The Sichuan Earthquake Response and State-Society Relations
Bin Xu; Chas Camic; Yang Cao; Peter Carroll; Ding- Ding Chen; Gary Alan Fine; Kazuya Fukuoka; Wendy Griswold; Xiaoyu Pu; Dingxin Zhao; Zhu Jiangang; Wang Chao; Hu Ming;  Zeren
Abstract
A consensus crisis is characterized by challenges to the state's managerial capacity, a critical need for civil society's services, a general agreement on priorities and goals, and the state's efforts to construct a morally respectable image. These features amplify the structural conditions favorable for relatively amicable state-society interactions. Existing studies of social response to the 2008 Sichuan earthquake focus on state-society relations, but neglect the role of situations. I argue that the earthquake is an example of a consensus crisis, which provided civil associations with a situational opening of political opportunity. M any scholars have marveled at the engagement of civil society in relief efforts after the 2008 Sichuan earthquake. 1 Most studies view this phenomenon as a natural outcome of long-term changes in the structural relations
between the state and society, while the disaster itself is assumed to be a "catalyst" that made the changes more strikingly evident. This observation takes the "catalyst" for granted, without further examination of how it sped up the reaction.
There are three major approaches in the field of Chinese civil society. First is the normative neo-Tocquevillean approach, which focuses on autonomous associations and their potential contribution to democratization. Very few Chinese civil associations fit into Tocqueville's ideal type, and most scholars do not use this approach in their empirical studies. The second approach, "corporatism", stresses the state's strategies to fend off democracy by controlling non-government associations and developing GONGOs (government-organized non-governmental organizations), such as the Communist Youth League, the Red Cross and the All-China Women's Federation. The Chinese state creates and controls GONGOs to incorporate social forces to consolidate power and communicate with other organizations in the non-governmental sector. 2 More recent studies take a third approach, focusing more on those associations neither created by the state nor officially incorporated into the state system, which I call "civil associations". 3 Scholars have highlighted their survival strategies as well as their complex, issuebased relations with the fragmented Chinese state. 4 Such relationships are termed "dependent autonomy", 5 "contingent symbiosis" 6 and "dynamic statism". 7 All the approaches focus almost exclusively on structural variations in statesociety relations concerning different issues and across different organization types. They pay less attention to situational variations in state-society relations. Some situations exemplify what Durkheim terms "collective shocks", 8 triggered by a key event that disrupts the social order. In contrast to normal, day-to-day situations, such collective shocks intensify state-society interactions, dramatize otherwise less visible structures in state-society relations and, sometimes, provide opportunities for civil society. Some empirical studies have attempted to address situations of collective shock by focusing on the utility of crises for allowing the state to improve and strengthen its governance 9 and permitting civil society to develop in response to public health crises, 10 but they do not address some key theoretical issues. What general features of a crisis can facilitate state-society cooperation? I argue that the Sichuan earthquake is a case of consensus crisis, a situation favorable to civil society's large-scale participation in public activities. The concept of "consensus crisis" refers to a situation "in which there is a general overall agreement about goals and about what should be done. It is one in which there is little dispute about assignment of priorities, about what legal constraints during the emergency can be ignored, etc. " 11 A massive disaster involves specific external threats; it requires all sectors of society, as well as the government, to take action; there is a high level of consensus regarding how to prioritize what must be done to solve immediate and technical problems. 12 Therefore, contrary to the prevailing expectation of panic and antisocial behavior after a disaster, cooperation and mutual help are common even among groups previously in conflict. 13 I use this concept to examine a type of situation, which may or may not occur in disasters, and inductively to theorize crucial features of the situation from the case of the Sichuan earthquake. Compared to other types of situations, a consensus crisis can produce some structural conditions in Chinese state-society relations to constitute situational opportunities for civil society to participate in large-scale activities. Empirically, the concept can answer the question of why it was that the Sichuan earthquake, rather than other events at the same historical moment, realized the structural conditions indicated by existing studies.
Data anD MethoDs
To examine the government's attitude, regulations and actions towards civil society after the earthquake, I collected government documents from core media outlets that are the state's official organs, "internal magazines" (neibu kanwu 内 部刊物) such as China Civil Affairs (Zhongguo minzheng 中国民政) and Disaster Reduction in China (Zhongguo jianzai 中国减灾), and other media reports.
In 2009, I conducted five months of fieldwork in Shanghai and Sichuan, interviewing 69 volunteers and staff members from 42 civil associations, participating in some associations' activities, and requesting texts, pictures and videos of their experiences in the wake of the Sichuan earthquake. In 2010, I also conducted follow-up and supplementary interviews. Subjects were recruited through my personal and professional networks accumulated during previous projects.
the sichuan earthquake as a c onsensus crisis On 12 May 2008 at 2.
28 p.m., a 7.9-magnitude earthquake struck Sichuan. It was the twelfth most destructive earthquake in human history, and the largest disaster in China since the Tangshan earthquake in 1976. The disaster caused 87,000 casualties and affected 46 million people in Sichuan, Shaanxi and Chongqing. Tremors were even felt by residents in Beijing and Shanghai, a thousand miles away. The earthquake's severity and complexity was beyond imagination. Because of damage to Sichuan's easily destroyed, rugged mountain roads, heavy machinery could not get through. Phone services in many areas were completely disrupted. The first group of responders and soldiers had to reach the epicenter on foot.
The Chinese government quickly mobilized personnel and resources to respond to the earthquake, but its all-out efforts could not meet the demands of the millions of survivors. Many remote and scattered villages could not be reached for several days. Tents and tarpaulins became rare commodities, and the state ordered big tent factories to work around the clock. Small but important tasks were not covered by the state's response plan: moving and processing corpses and ruins; nursing and caring for elderly, young, disabled and injured people; delivering supplies to remote villages; and providing psychological counseling and therapy for traumatized survivors. Moreover, the local state apparatus in most devastated places was seriously damaged. Many local officials died, lost their families, or were injured in the disaster. In Beichuan, for example, 23 per cent of local officials died; 200 were injured; and more lost their immediate relatives. 14 The extreme challenge posed by the earthquake was exacerbated by the state's reliance on "performance legitimacy". 15 If the Chinese state did not handle the disaster well, its legitimacy would be affected. The large population of affected people, driven by hunger and grief, could protest against the government. Consequently, the state attached much political importance to the disaster response. Two days after the earthquake, an editorial by "Zhong Zuwen" (仲祖文) 16 published in The People's Daily called the disaster response a test or even a "great battle", which must be the top priority for Party organizations at all levels, particularly those in the earthquake zone. 17 The central Party-state, including the military, various Party organizations and all bureaus and levels of the government, made similar announcements stressing that the disaster response was the first and foremost political task.
need for civil society's services
Though the Chinese government wants to shift some of its public service responsibilities to non-governmental organizations, it hesitates to build institutionalized, cooperative relations with them and is cautious about any policy changes that might nurture independent civil associations. 18 This contradictory attitude leads to various forms of state and social corporatism, such as GONGOs and their networks. 19 The earthquake created an urgent need for services from society, however; the crisis provided a political opportunity for civil associations to take a legitimate part in the large-scale rescue and relief efforts.
This process was not linear. The state's initial plan for mobilizing resources was to use the existing network of GONGOs, such as the Red Cross and the Youth League. These GONGOs certainly played a critical role, 20 but their capacity was quickly overwhelmed. For example, the Sichuan Provincial Red Cross had only 17 staff members to receive and process 2 billion yuan in donations. 21 According to my informants, the number of volunteers waiting in front of the Sichuan Red Cross office for dispatch ranged from several hundred to several thousand every day for the first two weeks. Some volunteers registered with the Red Cross or the Youth League but never got a call back. Donated food rotted in the badly managed Red Cross warehouse, and the Red Cross did not have enough vehicles to make deliveries. One of my interviewees was even able to "steal" medicines from the unguarded warehouse and deliver them to the ' quake zone. The inefficiency of the GONGOs thus frustrated many citizens, who then joined NGOs and informal groups.
Meanwhile, the local government in Sichuan felt the urgency more than any other government in China. Officials and state media in Sichuan sent an unambiguous message that ordinary citizens' donations and services were critically needed. Such calls, combined with citizens' spontaneous participation, led to a wave of volunteering immediately after the earthquake. For example, several hours after the ' quake, radio anchors called for blood donations, and long lines then formed at several blood stations in Chengdu. When hospitals in Dujiangyan, a town 30 miles from Chengdu, were overwhelmed with injured people, local radios called for citizens with vehicles to transport them to Chengdu. Chengdu taxi drivers used their internal radio network to provide transport from Dujiangyan. At a press conference, the vice-governor of Sichuan, Li Chengyun (李成云), tearfully thanked the taxi-driver volunteers, who were also enthusiastically praised by state media.
This local need was reinforced by a nationwide discourse of moral altruism. The Chinese state highlighted "socialist solidarity" based on the idea that "when people in one place suffer, other people throughout the country will provide their support" (yifang younan, bafang zhiyuan 一方有难， 八方支援). Right after the earthquake, Li Changchun (李长春), a member of the Standing Committee of the Politburo in charge of propaganda work, emphasized that state media reports must construct an atmosphere of solidarity to provide spiritual motivation for the response. 22 The surge in volunteering matched up well with this official discourse of moral altruism and was reported positively by state media inside and outside Sichuan.
Shawn Shieh and Guosheng Deng correctly emphasize the capabilities of civil society before the earthquake, 23 but this capacity had evolved unevenly: the state has channeled it into social service instead of social advocacy. Because of this political constraint, many NGOs were prepared for the social service needed in the earthquake response. For example, Warm Home in Shanghai, whose members I interviewed in 2009, had evolved from an advocacy organization to a socialservice one. Some of its oldest members were "liberal intellectuals", who prized NGO autonomy and its potential as an agent of democratization. Several years before, they had invited "politically sensitive" people to a symposium on "civil society and democracy", and self-published a pamphlet of speeches given at the symposium. They had also mobilized lawyers to offer free consultation to underprivileged people who wanted to sue the government or state-owned enterprises. 23. Shawn Shieh and Guosheng Deng, "An Emerging Civil Society".
After being warned by the government, the organization shifted its focus to small projects without political implications, including setting up libraries and activity rooms in schools in poor areas. These programs were greatly needed by many schools after the earthquake, and Warm Home established some workstations in the ' quake zone. Since a large proportion of Chinese NGOs still rely on the government for resources and permission, it is no wonder that many of them are geared toward service delivery instead of advocacy. 24 The earthquake gave NGOs an opportunity to develop their capacity further. Many lack resources due to restrictions on public fundraising and the high turnover rate of employees. The year 2008 provided opportunities in these areas, but before the earthquake few NGOs took them. The Beijing Olympics required hundreds of thousands of volunteers, but the volunteers were selected, trained and organized exclusively by GONGOs, especially the Youth League at all levels. The snowstorms in January and February were a missed opportunity for NGOs. Except for a few NGOs' conscious participation in certain cities, such as the "Green Ribbon Action" by an NGO network in Guizhou, most did not respond effectively to that disaster. After realizing their slow reaction, the members of Shanghai organizations whom I interviewed reflected on why they missed this opportunity, and their intention to be more alert and to react more promptly to the next disaster was evident. The Sichuan earthquake provided another opportunity. According to a survey conducted by Beijing Normal University, 73.2 per cent of the 60 NGOs that they investigated took action within 24 hours after the earthquake. 25 In the first month, NGOs and scholars organized at least six symposiums to discuss how NGOs could play a role different from the government in responding to the disaster. 26 As one of my interviewees put it, they thought: "Now it's the time for us civil associations (minjian zuzhi 民间组织) to play a role!" Third, informal groups provided the basis for civic engagement. 27 These groups do not have an explicit political goal, but serve as a collective base to allow members to pursue cultural and leisure interests outside their families and companies. I interviewed members of small groups catering to a range of interests that included architecture, antiques, book clubs, cars, the TV singing contest Super Girls (chaoji nüsheng 超级女声), mountaineering, charity and backpacking. Since the government does not pay attention to such groups, they enjoy a freedom of action that the formal NGOs do not always have. A considerable number were 24. For more examples, see Yiyi Lu, Non-Governmental Organizations in China. 25. Han Junkui and Ji Yin, "Wenchuan dizheng zhong de cishan xingwei fenxi: jiangshu NGO de gushi" (An Empirical Analysis of Social Welfare Actions in the 5.12 Earthquake: Focus on NGO), in Ming Wang (ed.), China Non-Profit Review (Beijing: Social Science Academic Press, 2009), pp. 1-25.
26. Xiao Yanzhong, Tan Huosheng, Tang Haihua and Yang Zhanguo, Duonan xingbang, pp. 123-24. 27. Gary Alan Fine and Brooke Harrington, "Tiny Publics: Small Groups and Civil Society", Sociological Theory, Vol. 22 (2004), pp. 341-56. already involved in public-spirited activities before the earthquake and were therefore already organized.
a General consensus on Goals and Priorities
Like other major disasters, the Sichuan earthquake generated a situational consensus on goals and priorities, most of which revolved around saving people's lives and providing assistance. The central government and leaders emphasized the political importance of the disaster for purposes of performance and moral legitimacy. Premier Wen Jiabao (温家宝) and other leaders stressed that saving people's lives was the paramount task for Party officials at all levels. Even several days after the earthquake, when people trapped under the rubble had almost no chance of survival, the central leaders emphasized that rescue is the "most important of important tasks" (zhongzhong zhi zhong 重中之重). 28 This technically inefficient effort was clearly intended to demonstrate the government's care for people's lives and to enhance its moral legitimacy.
To carry out this mission, the central government greatly reduced the autonomy of local authorities and took charge of the disaster response. According to The Law on Public Emergencies Response (2007, Article 8), 29 when a "particularly important emergency happens", the State Council and the Premiers lead the response, set up an emergency response group and send task force groups to direct the local response. After the Sichuan earthquake, the central government did even more than this law requires. Right after the earthquake, Wen Jiabao immediately rushed to the ' quake zone and assumed the position of commanderin-chief of the disaster response. He called emergency meetings in several places, attended by local and central officials and military officers. Most members of the Politburo Standing Committee went to Sichuan in the first two weeks to inspect the response work. In addition to Wen Jiabao, whose swift and high-profile appearance on various sites was widely publicized, Zhou Yongkang (周永康) went to Sichuan on 15 May, Hu Jintao (胡锦涛) on 16 May, Li Keqiang (李克强) on 17 May, Xi Jinping (习近平) and He Guoqiang (贺国强) on 19 May and Wu Bangguo (吴邦国) on 26 May. After visiting the affected areas, President Hu Jintao also visited Zhejiang and Hebei to supervise the production of tents and makeshift houses. Thus, the structural division between the central and local states was greatly reduced.
It would be wrong, however, to argue that this consensus on saving people's lives was imposed on local governments by the central government. governments, particularly at township and village levels, were embedded in local community networks and were thus expected by residents to respond to the disaster. Village and township cadres often organized response teams from local police, militias and residents. In several towns that I visited, residents reported the local cadres' quick response despite the loss of their own relatives and children. 30 The local governments' need for assistance was even more desperate. Local officials were overwhelmed by the daunting tasks of rescue and relief. One interviewee related how the township officials whom he encountered worked around the clock until they lost their voices. Their faces turned "blackish-red like a pig's liver". Their attitude toward the outside groups ranged from avoidance to facilitation. In some cases, they were too busy to talk with outside groups; in others, they helped volunteers to distribute supplies by maintaining order. Most NGOs and small groups reported that the officials' attitudes were "warm", "reasonable" or at least "not hostile". One of my interviewees attributed this cooperative attitude to the disaster, which, he believed, "turned the officials back to humans". Some issues emerged in the wake of the earthquake as a result of structural ambiguities between the state and NGOs, but these were quickly resolved on the basis of a general consensus on the priority of saving lives. One major issue was the illegal collection of donations. In China, only governments above the county level and a few state-sanctioned public foundations ( gongmu jijin 公募基金) have the legal right to organize "fund-raising activities". 31 In the wake of the Sichuan earthquake, however, numerous small groups and NGOs collected donations from their members and the public. They gained tremendous trust from donors, for they were able to provide detailed information on how the donations had been used.
The state demonstrated considerable flexibility. Some interviewees reported being investigated by the law enforcement, but the investigation was mainly about potential fraud and usually ended quickly. For example, Caring Babies, one of the groups that I interviewed, launched a blog to collect public donations-not money, but products related to babies and toddlers, mainly diapers and infant formula. They also carefully kept all documents. When the local police in Shanghai visited their company to investigate "fraudulence" and "human trafficking", the charges were easily cleared. Xiaoli, a member of this "two-man NGO", described the policemen as "friendly" and said that they did not seem to take the charges too seriously. When Xiaoli claimed that they hadn't done anything wrong, the policemen responded, "Yes, we knew that because we've been following your blog for a while. If you really did something wrong, you wouldn't just sit here and talk to me. " Other groups' bank accounts were frozen temporarily, but were soon reinstated once they showed evidence of prompt use of the donations. Many groups that I interviewed held various kinds of fund-raising activities, such as charity sales, street campaigns and online donations, but were not even investigated. All these cases suggest that the state temporarily suspended, or at least loosened, its legal restrictions for those organizations and individuals with evident charitable purposes.
On the society side, groups and NGOs did not make political claims even though they and their members were politically active in normal times. "B-log", a large blog-hosting website featuring many famous "liberal intellectuals" and political bloggers, organized a relief team headed by the company owner. They were able to collect 2,260,642.39 yuan (US$327,155), from bloggers within and outside China. The money was used to purchase supplies, which were delivered by their local members in Sichuan and by major organizers who flew there. However, the members both on the ground and on the website put aside their usual political condemnations of the government and focused on rescue and relief issues. Criticisms expressed online were limited to technical issues in the government's response. Other less politically active groups also had complaints about the local governments, but did not try to politicize the issues.
constructing a Moral image in the olympic Year
In 2008, the state wanted to use the Beijing Olympics to demonstrate China's rising power, but a series of incidents from the beginning of the year tarnished the government's domestic and international image. Snowstorms in January and February provoked criticism about the government's ability to respond to disaster. In March, Tibetans rioted and were quickly suppressed, but the government made a disastrous mistake-it did not give the media access to Tibet, and the outside world had to rely on Tibetan exiles for information. In April, pro-Tibet activists protested and disrupted the Beijing Olympics torch relay in many European and American cities.
In the midst of this tumult, the earthquake occurred. The casualties and tragedies provided the state with an opportunity to repair its moral image both internationally and domestically. The huge number of casualties muted international criticisms of China, at least temporarily. Tibetan activists and the Dalai Lama chose to pray instead of censure.
Traditional Chinese political culture provides three principal elements for moral legitimacy: a ruling élite's moral conduct should be in accordance with the "mandate of heaven"; governance should be benevolent and empathetic; and the state has moral responsibility for the people's well-being. 32 These tradi-32. Dingxin Zhao, "The Mandate of Heaven and Performance Legitimation in Historical and Contemporary China"; Yanqi Tong, "Morality, Benevolence, and Responsibility: Regime Legitimacy in China from Past tional elements have been incorporated into the Communist Party's ideologies and practices-for example, political discourses about the "people" and political practices that aim to improve the "cadre-mass relationship", but Hu and Wen exerted more effort to enhance the regime's moral legitimacy than had previous administrations. In addition to Hu's doctrine of "harmonious society" and Wen's numerous speeches about disadvantaged people's welfare, the government had eliminated agricultural taxes to reduce the peasants' burden, reformed the health care system and implemented a minimum living stipend standard. 33 The leaders, particularly Wen Jiabao, made frequent and swift appearances at various sites of disasters and accidents, comforting victims and handling responses. Hu and Wen also developed an unofficial norm that leaders should celebrate the Chinese New Year with ordinary people instead of their own families. 34 The Sichuan earthquake set the stage for another display of the compassionate nature of the state. Every detail of the government's response became a moral and emotional enactment. Premier Wen Jiabao became an instant hero because of the tears he shed on the rubble and the hugs he gave to starving children. 35 Official media reports also highlighted the state's deep concern and solicitude about people's lives. To demonstrate its openness, the state opened media reporting, welcomed foreign aid and rescue teams, and followed public opinion on some symbolic issues-for example, holding an unprecedented national mourning rite for disaster victims and suspending the Olympic torch relay during the mourning period.
The state's concern about its moral image also offered NGOs a chance to defend their activities from government intervention. For example, as the B-log organizers had anticipated, their impressive ability to collect donations got them into trouble with the police, who froze their bank account after seeing the unusual cash flow. The organizers decided to call on more than 20 journalists from domestic and foreign media outlets and go to the City Police Bureau to demand the money back. One of the organizers described the whole process to me:
We went there with 20-something journalists, mainly from foreign media, with cameras, camcorders and lighting devices. We actually frightened those boys in the City Police Bureau. Laoluo [owner of B-log] strode into their office-you know, 34. Compared to their predecessors, according to my content analysis of reports in the People's Daily, Hu and Wen spent every Chinese New Year with ordinary people, while their predecessors, Jiang Zemin and Zhu Rongji, missed several times. Jiang had stopped paying the Chinese New Year visits after 1997. Moreover, Hu and Wen actually spent time with people on New Year's eve and the New Year holiday, usually having "New Year's eve dinner" (nianyefan) with various kinds of people in their homes and schools.
35. Bin Xu, "Grandpa Wen: Scene and Political Performance", Sociological Theory, Vol. 30 (2012), pp. 1-16.
he is a big, tall guy, a Northeasterner, an imposing character-and began railing, "you f ***ing hooligans in uniform!"
The police officers' faces suddenly turned pale, but they restrained their anger because of the journalists' presence-at the time of the earthquake, Chengdu was under the spotlight, and foreign and domestic journalists were able to report in an unprecedentedly free manner. Every small issue of the government would be disseminated widely, so all kinds of state actors cautiously adjusted their performance in front of the cameras. The account was reinstated, and the money could again be used freely. This would not have been possible in normal times; as a matter of fact, B-log was shut down by the government several months after the earthquake.
In sum, the Sichuan earthquake constituted a consensus crisis with four characteristics: (1) the state's administrative capacity was challenged; (2) there was a general agreement on priorities and agenda; (3) there was a substantive need for civil society's engagement and service; and (4) the state had a strong desire to demonstrate a morally respectable image before both the domestic and international publics. Table 1 summarizes how the four characteristics of consensus crisis amplified some structural features of state-society relations, but weakened others.
The challenge to its administrative capacity increased the Chinese state's reliance on performance legitimacy and motivated it to take at-all-cost actions. The need for social service also created opportunities for civil society. While GONGOs were quickly overwhelmed by the post-disaster demands, NGOs were well prepared to deliver social services. Informal groups were even more flexible and responsive. The general agreement on saving people's lives weakened the conflicts and differences between the state and society and between the central state and local governments. Therefore, the reduction in conflicts and division greatly facilitated civil society's task-oriented and cooperative relations. Finally, the situation in 2008 amplified the state's reliance on moral legitimacy and enabled the state to project a caring image, reducing its propensity to use repression.
iMPact s of the c onsensus crisis
How did the Sichuan earthquake as a consensus crisis affect state-society relations in the long run? Some NGOs optimistically claimed that 2008 was the "birth year of Chinese civil society", leading to more social space and favorable policy changes for civil associations. 36 This optimism came from the enormous publicity and social recognition that the NGOs gained. Most NGO practitioners whom I interviewed had previously given several interviews to various media. Even informal groups were able to attract media attention and public support. Others, however, believed that the ephemeral euphoria was short-lived and did not improve relations between the authoritarian state and civil society. One of my interviewees said: "A crack appeared after the earthquake. Volunteers, NGOs and other new things burst out from the crack. But now, the crack is closing. "
The reality is more mixed than both perspectives. A consensus crisis does not just come and go without having any impact on relations between state and society. When the crisis passes, however, its effects are constrained by more structural conditions of state-society relations. Some critical features changed, and consequently civil associations were in a different political context. The state resumed its managerial capacity as soon as the local governments in the affected areas recovered from the disaster. Moreover, the central government mobilized the other provinces, particularly the wealthy ones, to support the affected areas in a "one-on-one" manner (duikou zhiyuan 对口支援). The plan was to pair an affected county with a province that invested heavily in recovery projects.
The government's need for civil-society service reduced significantly in volume as the crisis faded, but long-term work pertaining to disabled, elderly, homeless and young population groups was still not covered by large-scale government projects. Some local governments and schools learned how to attract outside aid and investment, and welcomed projects that brought them money and publicity. For example, in Zundao, a town in Mianzhu, the township government cooperated with several volunteer organizations and a real-estate developer to establish a "Volunteers Coordinating Office" to arrange tasks and activities pertaining to reconstruction. 37 Activities related to cultural programs in local schools and communities also persisted. The cultural programs usually resulted from collaboration between civil associations, local governments, the media and corporations. For example, an informal group with whom I travelled for about two weeks in the earthquake zone cooperated with the newspaper Southern Weekend (Nanfang zhoumou 南方周末) and a formal, registered NGO to set up several school libraries. For some of the libraries, the registered NGO sent a paid staff member to live there and manage the libraries. Books were collected through the informal group through their online networks. Southern Weekend helped to publicize the program and provided some funds.
At the national level, the Chinese state recognizes civil associations' contributions to post-disaster relief and reconstruction and, at least verbally, continues to encourage their participation. The Wenchuan Earthquake Recovery and Rebuilding Regulations (8 June 2008), 38 the government's guiding document, encouraged citizens and organizations to participate actively in the post-disaster recovery and rebuilding work (Article 5). Within the Civil Affairs system, officials at various levels took a more positive attitude toward spontaneous volunteers and organizations. High-ranking officials in the Ministry of Civil Affairs spoke several times between 2008 and 2010 in praise of the role of civil associations as "sustaining half of the sky"; 39 they described NGOs as "important elements of a harmonious society" 40 and volunteers as model citizens. 41 The central government also introduced new policies to allow more public foundations to raise funds in disaster situations, even if their initial functions are not directly related to disaster relief.
After the emergency period, however, a lack of general agreement on priorities and goals re-emerged. For the state, "maintaining stability" took higher priority. Protests launched by parents who believed that their children had been killed as a result of the shoddy construction of schools took place before the extremely sensitive anniversary of 4 June. Consequently, in early June, Zhou Yongkang, a member of the Politburo Standing Committee, visited some of the most devastated places to urge the armed police and other law enforcement personnel to "maintain social stability". 42 Zhou's visit was interpreted as a signal that political opportunities were going to be restricted again. After the Beijing Olympics in August, international attention shifted from China to the global financial crisis, and the Chinese state was out of the spotlight and less concerned with its moral image.
As a consequence of the re-emergence of contention and the state's reduced concern with its moral legitimacy, the space for civic association contracted. Central and local governments kept a closer eye on civil associations, particularly those with a religious affiliation or any other background interpreted by the government as "political". One of my interviewees who worked for a Christian organization was told not to stay overnight in the earthquake zone. In many other cases, volunteers were asked to show their identification and to register with local governments. 43 Local governments cooperated with corporations and with bigger and wealthier domestic and overseas NGOs, while smaller groups could only survive on the margin or were expelled. 44 During my visits to the earthquake areas, I encountered many non-governmental organizations with one or two low-paid staff members living and working in makeshift rooms. Many of the staff members, who were young college graduates, relied on idealism to sustain extended stays under difficult working conditions. Some NGO practitioners expressed their suspicion of the flamboyant slogan "birth year of Chinese civil society". A director of an NGO coalition in Chengdu said bluntly that 2008 was the birth year of foundations, not of small NGOs. Several NGO directors even believed that the government's control was getting tighter. Hua-dan Studio, a Hong Kongbased organization with expertise in psychological therapy, had to sign a document promising that they would not say anything "damaging to the nation's image" and that they accepted the local government's supervision and management of their activities. "If any inappropriate behavior happens", the document reads, "the studio will stop all activities. " 45 The Volunteers Coordinating Office in Zundao was initially seen as an ideal model for civil society's cooperation with the government, but it was later taken over and transformed by the township government into a "Social Resources Coordinating Leading Group". Vol unteer groups finally left Zundao, but the real-estate developer stayed and cut a deal with the local government on a large-scale reconstruction project. Even NGOs that benefited from the consensus crisis adjusted their strategies afterwards. They voluntarily avoided involvement in complex issues. S&R, an NGO in Chengdu with many workstations in affected areas, explicitly required its employees and volunteers not to "get involved in conflicts within the community". The Chengdu Disaster Management Center (CDMC), another NGO in Chengdu, practiced the same strategy. Its daily work in Hanwang included opening libraries for children, showing movies and teaching women knitting skills. None of these activities touches on contentious issues in Hanwang, such as parents' protests about school construction or disputes regarding relocation. According to the director of the CDMC, the organization plays a role as "interpreter" of the government's policies, instead of acting on behalf of the people. The CDMC's major principle is: "don't make trouble, don't increase pressure, and be a good assistant to the government".
In sum, the consensus crisis brought some changes favorable for NGOs' development, and they gained visibility, social recognition and some room for further engagement in the affected areas, but the development was constrained by the reconsolidation of political structures after the consensus crisis. Although the government recognizes a long-term need for civil society's services and allows some room for this to occur, these changes are compromised when the government resumes its capacity to govern, resulting in conflicting priorities and goals and reduced concern with moral image. NGOs with stronger connections to the government and abundant resources have more opportunities than others, and their social-service function is reinforced.
c onc lu sion s
As discussed, I define a consensus crisis as a situation characterized by challenges to the state's managerial capacity, a need for civil society's service, a general agreement on priorities and goals, and incentives for the state to construct a responsive and open image. These characteristics are mutually reinforcing. As a result, consensus crises amplify some structural features of state-society relations, but weaken others. They facilitate civil society's participation in large-scale activities and cooperation with the state. Consensus crises have long-term effects on civil society's development, but such effects are uneven, and constrained by the existing political structure.
Consensus crises usually occur in the wake of large-scale disasters and public emergencies with the characteristics discussed above. The Yushu earthquake in 2010, for example, is another case of consensus crisis, and in many senses resembles the 2008 Sichuan earthquake. In 2010, it was a remote in the Tibet-Qinghai Plateau that was hit, and the complex geology hampered rescue and relief efforts. Civil society's participation was needed, and there was also an evident agreement between state and society on goals and priorities. The state's desire to demonstrate a moral image was strengthened by the fact that most residents in Yushu were Tibetan Chinese. This led to an all-out effort by the Chinese government: Wen Jiabao again rushed to the earthquake zone, and the provincial government quickly mobilized resources and personnel. Meanwhile, civil associations also responded quickly, particularly ones like Gesanghua Western China Education Aids with previous projects in the area. The Yushu earthquake differed from the 2008 one in that, for a short period, local governments discouraged civil associations from entering the ' quake zone, in order not to clog up the area's already congested roads. This action was interpreted by some Hong Kong newspapers as a government restriction on civil associations' access to the politically sensitive Tibetan area but, although this political interpretation is plausible, no strong evidence supports it. Associations already in Yushu before the measure (and even those that entered the area after the restriction was put in place) were not expelled; these associations included Hong Kong Oxfam, which continues to undertake long-term projects in the area. The Yushu earthquake generated some effects on state-society relations, consolidating civil associations' role in disaster response and their cooperation with the government. Shortly after the earthquake, One Foundation, which was set up and run by Jet Li and actively engaged in relief efforts for both the Sichuan and Yushu earthquakes, obtained legal status as a public foundation, enabling it to collect and manage donations. This opened the possibility for other private foundations to obtain public status. On the other hand, donations collected by the public foundations were forcibly transferred to the Qinghai provincial government to "facilitate management". Although most public foundations are controlled by the state, this move infuriated many civil associations, who proclaimed the "death of charity" in China.
The year 2008 also provided an example of a different situation: the Beijing Olympics. The Olympics were an orchestrated event. Orchestrated events need public participation, but their major purpose is to demonstrate the state's might, the nation's image and the Party's stability in leadership transition, rather than to solve a crisis. They reproduce and reinforce state corporatism in the existing political structure. Designed and rehearsed by the state to demonstrate an image of a rising China, the Olympics needed numerous volunteers, but they were strictly selected and trained by the Youth League and other GONGOs and worked in a militaristic way. Civil associations neither acquired many opportunities nor felt enthusiastic about the Olympics.
Not all large-scale disasters automatically lead to the rapid development of civil society and state-society cooperation. Some disasters almost immediately provoke criticism of the state and become contentious. Only consensus crises create situational openings for civil society to access the political opportunity structure, and even then, whether civil society can seize the opportunity depends on its structural readiness and on interpretations of the political opportunity. For example, four months before the earthquake, lack of readiness impeded NGO participation in the case of the snowstorm in late January and early February 2008. When the storm subsided, various media and NGO newsletters began to reflect on why the civil associations were unable to respond adequately when they should and could have done so. Some attributed the failure to the NGOs' own incapacity, while others blamed the restrictive institutional conditions. 46 Neither explanation is convincing, however, since four months later, although institutional conditions had not improved much, the same "incapable" associations played a much more significant role.
The most plausible reason for the inadequate response was the associations' failure to interpret the snowstorm as an opportunity. Response to previous disasters was mostly monopolized by the state, and there had been no large-scale civil society involvement. As one of the NGO managers confessed, when the snowstorm started most of them remained "insensitive" because "the grand narratives (about the snowstorm) in the mainstream media had nothing to do with 'grass-roots' people like me". 47 As a result, his organization did not take action until the end of January, when he heard that some small groups in Guangzhou had delivered food to people stranded in railway stations. On the other hand, the wide discussion about civil associations' failure alerted them to possibilities of helping after the Sichuan earthquake, even though their structural ability and institutional conditions were not significantly improved. When the earthquake happened, they immediately interpreted the disaster as an opportunity, and took action.
Theoretically, both structural features of state-society relations and a consensus crisis are necessary, but not sufficient, conditions for Chinese civil society to develop in a short period of time and to cooperate with the state. An examination of structural relations between the state and civil society must be combined with an investigation of situations, to achieve a thorough understanding of the complexity of civil society's relations with the state. By addressing consensus crisis and its general features, this article calls for attention to the role of events in state-society relations. 
The project is funded by a research grant from the Association for Asian Studies (The China and Inner Asia Council) and the Ethnographic Research Fellowship from the Department of Sociology at Northwestern University.
1.
References
; 2008; Associations and the Chinese State: Contested Spaces;M. E. Sharpe
Jonathan Unger; Anita Chan; 1995; China, Corporatism, and the East Asian Model;The Australian Journal of Chinese Affairs
Anthony J Spires; 2011-07; I include both NGOs having a formal structure and small, voluntary groups without features of formal organizations. I use "NGOs" to refer to the former, and I call the latter "informal groups;American Journal of Sociology
Yiyi Lu; 2009; Non-Governmental Organizations in China: The Rise of Dependent Autonomy;Routledge
Qiusha Ma; 2006; Non-Governmental Organizations in Contemporary China: Paving the Way to Civil Society?;Routledge
Yiyi Lu; ; Non-Governmental Organizations in China;
Anthony J Spires; ; Contingent Symbiosis and Civil Society in an Authoritarian State;
Bin Xu; Xiaoyu Pu; 2010-03; Dynamic Statism and Memory Politics: A Case Analysis of the Chinese War Reparations Movement;The China Quarterly
Emile Durkheim; 1912; The Elementary Forms of Religious Life, trans. Karen E. Fields;Free Press
Patricia Thornton; 2009-01; Crisis and Governance: SARS and the Resilience of the Chinese Body Politic;The China Journal
Jonathan Schwartz; 2009; The Impact of Crises on Social Service Provision in China: The State and Society Respond to SARS;Routledge
Enrico L Quarantelli; 1970; Emergent Accommodation Groups: Beyond Current Collective Behavior Typologies;Prentice Hall
Russell Dynes; Enrico L Quarantelli; 1971; The Absence of Community Conflict in the Early Phases of Natural Disaster;University of Notre Dame Press
Lee Clarke; 2002; Panic: Myth or Reality?;Contexts
; ; stands for "Zhongyang zuzhibu wenjian;
; ; The Organization Bureau often uses People's Daily editorials to send messages to lower-level cadres;
 Zhong Zuwen; 2008-05-14; Party Cadres Must Be on the Front Line;Renmin ribao (People's Daily
Xiaoyuan Shang; Xiaoming Wu; Yue Wu; 2005-03; Welfare Provision for Vulnerable Children: The Missing Role of the State;The China Quarterly
Jonathan Unger; Anita Chan; ; Associations in a Bind: The Emergence of Political Corporatism;
; ; Associations and the Chinese State;
 Deng Guoshen; ; Zhongguo jiuzai jizhi fenxi;
Tu Chonghang; 2008-06-10; Dizheng kaoyan Sichuan sheng hongshizihui;
Zhu Jiangang; Wang Chao; Hu Ming;  Zeren; 2012-05-27; my email communications with the Zundao volunteer group, who provided some documents related to this cooperation;
Li Xueju; 2008; Thoughts about the Wenchuan Earthquake);China Civil Affairs